
Typographic attacks inject text into images, leading to targeted misclassifications.

 

Example: A photo of Elon Musk labeled "US President" tricks CLIP into thinking this is the U.S. president.



We studied the behavior of CLIP under typographic attacks and found a defense.🧵(1/11)

First let's understand at which layers the attack becomes effective.

We use linear probes to show that

🖼️ Visual understanding builds gradually

💬 Typographic understanding suddenly emerges in later layer

🧵(2/11)

To detect which attention heads are causal for typographic understanding, we introduce a Typographic Attention Scores (T_i). It measures how much the CLS token attends to the text region in the image.



💡The higher T_i, the stronger the heads attention bias towards text.

🧵(3/11)

Let's connect the dots...

🟦 Heads with T_i > 50

🟪 Probe accuracy of typographic probe

Only once the high T_i heads are present the typographic probe accuracy lifts off.

🧵(4/11)


Tag People

Descriptions
So a small set of heads enable typographic attack? Let's defend against attacks by turning them off.

❌ Disable all of them → hurt overall non-typographic performance

❌ Leave all of them → security risk is not addressed

✅ Construct a sparse typographic circuit and ablate it

So a small set of heads enable typographic attack?



✅ Let's defend against typographic attacks by turning them off.

1️⃣ Construct a sparse typographic circuit C

2️⃣ show it's causality 

3️⃣ ablate it.

🧵(6/11)

2️⃣ To demonstrate the C's causality we manipulate the attention pattern of the cls-to-cls attention. 



⬆️ High self attention → less attention on text  

⬇️ Low self attention → more attention on text



This diagram demonstrates our intervention👇

🧵(7/11)

The results are crystal clear 💎 Our circuit is causal.



⬆️ High self attention → less attention on text  → correct classification

⬇️ Low self attention → more attention on text → misclassification



🧵(8/11)


Tag People

Descriptions
Here are some examples of safety relevant typographic attacks and how their (mis)classifications are affected by tuning the cls-to-cls self attention:

 

🧵(9/11)

🧠 In summary: we create a defense against typographic attacks by utilizing mechanistic interpretability methods. By circuit ablating attention heads with high Typographic Attention Scores (T_i). 



Link to the paper: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2508.20570



🧵(10/11)

Cheers to @cvenhoff00 and all the others involved in this project.



🧵(11/11)

Tips to get started

Press 
ctrl
⏎
 or add 2 empty lines to continue your thread
Drop videos, images & GIFs in the editor
Tag your drafts by clicking the  button in the top right corner
Share your drafts to get feedback 

Lorenz's Writing Assistant
AI that writes like you

Learns from your writing

Understands social media

Turns ideas into posts that land

BETA

